.\" margo(1) — Wayland compositor
.\" Hand-written roff. Keep in sync with `margo --help` and CHANGELOG.
.TH MARGO 1 "2026-06-01" "margo 0.9.1" "Margo Manual"
.SH NAME
margo \- a feature-rich Wayland tiling compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B margo
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B margo
is a Rust + Smithay Wayland compositor with dynamic tiling, forked in
spirit from the dwl/mango lineage and rewritten from scratch. It ships a
first-party desktop shell
.RB ( mshell )
and a family of companion tools.
.PP
margo composes windows with 14 tiling layouts (tile, scroller, grid,
monocle, deck, dwindle, \[char46]\&.\&.\&.), per-tag layout memory, a
nine-tag workspace model, and a PCRE2-style window-rule engine. It exposes
a Unix-socket control IPC (see
.B IPC
below) plus the standard
.BR foreign-toplevel-list " and " ext-workspace " protocols."
The shell and tooling read state as JSON over the same socket.
.PP
margo is normally launched by a display manager via the bundled
.I margo.desktop
session entry (or the uwsm-managed variant), not invoked by hand. Run it
directly only for nested
.RB ( --winit )
or debugging sessions.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Path to the configuration file.
Default:
.IR ~/.config/margo/config.conf .
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-startup\-command " " \fICMD\fR
Shell command run once, after the compositor is ready.
.TP
.B \-\-winit
Use the winit backend (nested Wayland/X11 window) instead of the
udev/DRM backend. Useful for development on top of another compositor.
.TP
.BR \-\-xwayland\-satellite " " [\fIBINARY\fR]
Disable the in-tree Smithay XWayland and run Supreeeme's
.B xwayland\-satellite
as a separate process instead. More resilient (an X11 client crash
can't take the compositor down) and inherits its HiDPI cursor, primary
selection, and clipboard fixes. Pass without an argument to use the
binary from
.BR PATH ;
pass
.RI = PATH
to choose one. Mutually exclusive with
.BR \-\-no\-xwayland .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-xwayland
Disable XWayland entirely \(em a pure-Wayland session with no X11
client support. Wins over
.B \-\-xwayland\-satellite
if both are given.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help (\fB\-h\fR for a short summary, \fB\-\-help\fR for the long form).
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SH "KEYBINDINGS AND DISPATCH"
Keybindings are defined in the config file as
.B bind
lines that name a
.IR "dispatch action" .
Every action is also reachable at runtime through
.BR "mctl dispatch" .
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
bind = super,Return,spawn,kitty
bind = super,1,view,1
bind = super+ctrl,Escape,unscratchpad
.EE
.in
.PP
For the complete, authoritative catalogue of dispatch actions (grouped
by category, with argument shapes), run:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
mctl actions \-\-verbose
.EE
.in
.SS "Tag bitmask convention"
Tags are a bitmask: tag
.I N
is
.RI "1 << (" N "\-1)" .
Tag 1 = 1, tag 2 = 2, tag 3 = 4, \[char46]\&.\&.\&, tag 8 = 128, tag 9 = 256.
.SH IPC
margo's control IPC is a single Unix-domain socket at
.IR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/margo/margo-ipc.sock
(also exported as
.BR MARGO_SOCKET ).
Clients send newline-delimited text requests and receive newline-delimited
JSON replies:
.TP
.B get \fItopic\fR
One-shot query (\fIstate\fR, \fIclients\fR, \fImonitors\fR, \fItags\fR,
\fIfocused\fR, \fIlayouts\fR, \fIkeyboard-layout\fR, …).
.TP
.B watch \fItopic\fR
Stream a fresh JSON frame on every state change. The desktop shell
subscribes to \fBwatch state\fR and mirrors each frame into its reactive
store.
.TP
.B dispatch \fIaction\fR [\fIargs\fR]
Run a compositor action (the same verbs as
.B bind
lines).
.PP
.BR mctl (1)
is the reference client. Scripts can drive it directly, e.g.
.RB "\(lq" "printf 'get state\\n' | socat - UNIX-CONNECT:$MARGO_SOCKET" "\(rq."
.SH CONFIGURATION
The config is plain text
.RI ( key " = " value )
with regex window rules. It is read at startup and hot-reloadable with
.B mctl reload
(or the
.B reload
dispatch action). Validate a file without applying it using
.BR "mctl check\-config" ;
inspect diagnostics from the last reload with
.BR "mctl config\-errors" .
.PP
A fully commented example is installed at
.IR /usr/share/doc/margo/config.example.conf .
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/margo/config.conf
Compositor configuration (hot-reloadable).
.TP
.I ~/.config/margo/
Per-tag layout profiles
.RI ( layout_ <name> .conf ),
keybind fragments, and shell-managed config fragments.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/margo/margo-ipc.sock
Control IPC socket (also exported as \fBMARGO_SOCKET\fR).
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/margo/session.json
Saved per-monitor tag/layout state
.RB ( "mctl session\-save" " / " session\-load ).
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/margo/config.example.conf
Annotated example configuration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MARGO_LOG
tracing filter, e.g.
.IR info ", " debug ", or " margo=trace,smithay=info .
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
Base for the runtime state directory; falls back to
.IR /run/user/<uid> .
.SH EXAMPLES
Start a nested instance for development:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
margo \-\-winit
.EE
.in
.PP
Launch with verbose logging and an autostart command:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
MARGO_LOG=debug margo \-s 'kitty'
.EE
.in
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mctl (1),
.BR mshellctl (1),
.BR mlayout (1),
.BR mscreenshot (1),
.BR mlock (1),
.BR mpicker (1)
.PP
Project documentation:
.UR https://github.com/kenanpelit/margo
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
margo is developed by Kenan Pelit and contributors.
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/kenanpelit/margo/issues
.UE .
