.\" mctl(1) — margo compositor IPC client
.\" Command list mirrors `mctl --help`; the exhaustive flag surface
.\" lives in `mctl <CMD> --help` and `mctl actions`.
.TH MCTL 1 "2026-06-01" "margo 0.9.1" "Margo Manual"
.SH NAME
mctl \- query and control the margo Wayland compositor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mctl
.RI [ \-o " " OUTPUT ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS .\|.\|.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mctl
talks to a running
.BR margo (1)
compositor over the
.B dwl-ipc-unstable-v2
protocol (and reads the
.I state.json
snapshot for richer queries). It controls the
.IR compositor "\(em"
windows, tags, layouts, and the dispatch action table.
.PP
For the
.I shell
(menus, audio, brightness, wallpaper) use
.BR mshellctl (1)
instead; the two talk to different daemons.
.SH "GLOBAL OPTIONS"
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIOUTPUT\fR
Target output (connector name, e.g.
.IR eDP-1 ).
Default: the focused output, falling back to the first.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "Query"
.TP
.B status
Print current focused-client / tag state (one shot).
.TP
.B watch
Stream state updates until interrupted (Ctrl-C).
.TP
.B clients
List every open window with tag, monitor, app_id, and title.
.TP
.B outputs
List connected outputs with mode, position, scale, and layout.
.TP
.B focused
Print the focused window's app_id + title (terse, scriptable).
.TP
.B config-errors
Show config diagnostics from the last reload (niri-style).
.SS "Control"
.TP
.B dispatch \fIACTION\fR [\fIARGS\fR]
Run a compositor action by name (the same names used in
.B bind
lines). See
.B ACTIONS
below.
.TP
.B tags \fIBITMASK\fR
Set the active tagset on the target output (raw tag bitmask).
.TP
.B layout \fIINDEX\fR
Set the layout by 0-based index (matches the compositor's layout list).
.TP
.B client-tags \fIBITMASK\fR
Mutate the focused client's tag bitmask (advanced).
.TP
.B reload
Reload
.IR ~/.config/margo/config.conf .
.TP
.B theme \fIPRESET\fR
Live-swap the visual theme preset.
.TP
.B twilight \fI.\|.\|.\fR
Control the built-in blue-light filter (toggle / temperature / mode).
.TP
.B quit
Quit the compositor cleanly.
.SS "Session"
.TP
.B session-save
Save per-monitor tag/layout state to
.IR session.json .
.TP
.B session-load
Restore per-monitor tag/layout state from
.IR session.json .
.SS "Scripting and tooling"
.TP
.B run \fIFILE\fR
One-shot Rhai script execution against the live compositor.
.TP
.B actions " " [\fB\-\-group\fR \fIGROUP\fR] [\fB\-\-names\fR] [\fB\-\-verbose\fR]
List every dispatch action margo accepts (for binds and
.BR "mctl dispatch" ).
.TP
.B rules \fIAPP_ID\fR \fITITLE\fR
Dry-run window rules against an app_id / title pair.
.TP
.B check-config " " [\fIFILE\fR]
Validate a config file (niri-style diagnostics) without applying it.
.TP
.B migrate \fIFILE\fR
Translate a Hyprland or Sway/i3 config to margo.
.TP
.B completions \fISHELL\fR
Emit a shell-completion script
.RI ( bash " | " zsh " | " fish " | " elvish " | " powershell ).
.PP
Run
.B mctl
.I COMMAND
.B \-\-help
for the full argument surface of any command.
.SH ACTIONS
Dispatch actions are the verbs behind both
.B bind
lines and
.BR "mctl dispatch" .
The authoritative, grouped catalogue \(em with argument shapes \(em is:
.PP
.in +4n
.EX
mctl actions \-\-verbose
mctl actions \-\-group Tag      # one category
mctl actions \-\-names         # bare names (for completions)
.EE
.in
.SS "Tag bitmask convention"
Tag
.I N
is
.RI "1 << (" N "\-1)" :
tag 1 = 1, tag 2 = 2, tag 3 = 4, \[char46]\&.\&.\&, tag 8 = 128, tag 9 = 256.
.SH EXAMPLES
.in +4n
.EX
mctl status
mctl watch
mctl tags 128                  # switch to tag 8
mctl layout 1                  # scroller layout
mctl dispatch togglefloating
mctl dispatch view 4           # switch to tag 3
mctl dispatch spawn 'kitty \-e htop'
mctl \-o DP-2 layout 0          # target a specific output
.EE
.in
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/margo/config.conf
Compositor configuration that
.B reload
re-reads.
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/margo/state.json
State snapshot mctl reads for rich queries.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR margo (1),
.BR mshellctl (1),
.BR mlayout (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Part of margo, by Kenan Pelit and contributors \(em
.UR https://github.com/kenanpelit/margo
.UE .
