.\" mplay(1) — margo's native mpv companion
.\" Command list mirrors `mplay --help`.
.TH MPLAY 1 "2026-06-01" "margo 0.9.3" "Margo Manual"
.SH NAME
mplay \- control an mpv window and play video wallpapers under margo
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mplay
.I COMMAND
.RI [ ARGS .\|.\|.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mplay
is margo's first-party mpv helper. It drives a single floating mpv
window through the compositor (via
.BR mctl (1))
and mpv's own JSON IPC socket, and it plays looping video wallpapers
natively on the background layer (an in-tree port of mpvpaper, using
wlr-layer-shell + EGL + libmpv \(em no external
.B mpvpaper
process).
.PP
The window commands talk to a running mpv started with an IPC socket
(see
.BR start ).
The wallpaper commands run an independent engine per output.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B start
Launch mpv in pseudo-gui mode with a JSON IPC socket. No-op if mpv is
already running with its socket.
.TP
.B toggle
Toggle play/pause on the running mpv.
.TP
.BI play " [URL]"
Play a file or URL. With no argument, reads the clipboard. YouTube/ytdl
URLs are detected automatically. If mpv is already running the source is
loaded in place (replace); otherwise a new mpv window is spawned.
.TP
.BI download " [URL]"
Download a YouTube video to
.I ~/Downloads
with
.BR yt-dlp .
Alias:
.BR dl .
.TP
.B snap
Cycle the floating mpv window across the four screen corners (top-left
\(-> top-right \(-> bottom-right \(-> bottom-left). A tiled or oversized
window is first floated and shrunk to the default size.
.TP
.B pin
Toggle pinning the mpv window to every tag (sticky).
.TP
.B focus
Focus the mpv window, hopping monitor and switching tag as needed.
.TP
.B stop
Quit mpv.
.TP
.BI "media " "ACTION " [ PLAYER ]
Smart media control across players. \fIACTION\fR is one of
.IR toggle ", " play ", " pause ", " stop ", " next ", " prev ", " status .
\fIPLAYER\fR targets a specific player \(em
.IR spotify ", " vlc ", " mpv ", " mpd " (" mpc "), " browser
\(em or, omitted, auto-detects the best active one (scored across mpv,
MPD, and MPRIS players, biased toward the last-used one). Spotify is
launched on demand when targeted explicitly. Shows a now-playing
notification with album art. Alias:
.BR m .
.TP
.BI "wallpaper start " "SRC " \
[ \-\-output\ NAME ]\ [ \-\-mute ]\ [ \-\-no\-loop ]\ [ \-\-scale\ MODE ]\ [ \-\-daemon ]
Play
.I SRC
(a video file or URL) as a wallpaper on the background layer.
.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-output " NAME"
Target a single output by connector name (default: all outputs).
.TP
.B \-\-mute
Mute audio.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-loop
Play once instead of looping.
.TP
.BI \-\-scale " MODE"
.IR fit ", " fill " (default), or " stretch .
.TP
.B \-\-daemon
Fork into the background.
.RE
.TP
.BI "wallpaper stop " "[ \-\-output NAME ]"
Stop the wallpaper on
.I NAME
(default: every running instance). Alias for the group:
.BR wall .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B MARGO_MPV_SOCKET
mpv JSON IPC socket path (default
.IR /tmp/mpvsocket ).
.TP
.B MARGO_MPV_WIDTH ", " MARGO_MPV_HEIGHT
Default window size (640\(mu360).
.TP
.B MARGO_MPV_MARGIN_X ", " MARGO_MPV_MARGIN_Y
Corner margins for
.B snap
(32 / 96).
.TP
.B YT_DLP_BROWSER_USER_AGENT
Override the user-agent used by the embedded yt-dlp shim.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/mplay/<output>.pid
Wallpaper engine pidfiles (one per output, or
.I all.pid
when targeting every output).
.TP
.I $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/mplay/ytdl-shim
Generated wrapper handing mpv's ytdl_hook back to
.BR "mplay ytdlp" .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mctl (1),
.BR margo (1),
.BR mpv (1),
.BR yt-dlp (1)
