.\" mshellctl(1) — margo desktop-shell IPC client
.\" Command list mirrors `mshellctl --help`; per-command detail is in
.\" `mshellctl <CMD> --help`.
.TH MSHELLCTL 1 "2026-06-01" "margo 0.9.1" "Margo Manual"
.SH NAME
mshellctl \- control the margo desktop shell (mshell)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mshellctl
.I COMMAND
.RI [ SUBCOMMAND "] [" ARGS .\|.\|.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mshellctl
drives the running margo desktop shell
.RB ( mshell )
over the session D-Bus (service
.IR com.mshell.Shell ).
It controls the
.IR shell "\(em"
menus, bars, audio, brightness, wallpaper, and the lock screen.
.PP
This is distinct from
.BR mctl (1),
which controls the
.I compositor
(windows, tags, layouts). The two talk to different daemons \(em don't
conflate them.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "Menus and bars"
.TP
.B menu \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Open / close a shell menu:
.IR control-center ", " dashboard ", " mdash ", " cpu-dashboard ", " audio-dashboard ,
.IR ssh-sessions ", " session ", " plugin ", \[char46]\&.\&.\&."
.TP
.B bar \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Hide or reveal bars.
.TP
.B hidden-bar \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Control the Hidden Bar drawer widget
.RI ( toggle " | " expand " | " collapse " | " pin " | " unpin ).
.TP
.B settings \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Open / control the settings window.
.TP
.B wizard
Open the in-shell setup wizard (a layer-shell menu).
.SS "Audio and media"
.TP
.B audio \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Volume, mute, mic, and device switching \(em e.g.
.IR volume-up ", " "volume " PERCENT ", " mute ", " "output " next .
.TP
.B media \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Control MPRIS players:
.IR toggle ", " next ", " prev ", " status ", " list .
.TP
.B brightness \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Backlight control:
.IR up " | " down .
.SS "Appearance"
.TP
.B set-wallpaper \fIPATH\fR
Set the current wallpaper to a specific image.
.TP
.B wallpaper \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Cycle the wallpaper:
.IR next " | " prev " | " random .
.TP
.B theme \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Inspect or switch the colour scheme (the same picker as Settings \(->
Theme \(-> Color Scheme), applied live with no restart:
.IR list " [" \-\-names\-only "] | " get " | " "set \fINAME\fR" .
.B set
matching ignores case and
.RB ` \- '/` _ '/space
separators, so
.IR kenp ", " tokyo\-night " and " "\(dqTokyo Night\(dq"
all resolve;
.B theme list
prints the valid names.
.SS "Session and system"
.TP
.B lock " " [\fBcheck\fR]
Lock the session. Bare
.B lock
locks;
.B lock check
reports the current lock state.
.TP
.B quit
Kill mshell.
.TP
.B plugin \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Manage installed WASM plugins (e.g. reload from disk).
.TP
.B screenshot \fISUBCOMMAND\fR
Bridge to the
.BR mscreenshot (1)
helper (e.g. the in-shell region selector).
.TP
.B inspect
Launch the GTK4 inspector (find CSS node ids / classes).
.TP
.B doctor
One-shot health check of the shell: session-bus reachability, whether
.B com.mshell.Shell
is up, and whether the running shell matches this
.BR mshellctl 's
version (a stale shell after an upgrade is the usual "my new feature is
missing" cause). Exits non-zero on error. Run
.B mctl doctor
for the compositor side.
.TP
.B completions \fISHELL\fR
Emit a shell-completion script to stdout
.RI ( bash " | " zsh " | " fish " | " elvish " | " powershell ).
.PP
Run
.B mshellctl
.I COMMAND
.B \-\-help
for the full subcommand and argument surface.
.SH EXAMPLES
.in +4n
.EX
mshellctl menu control-center     # toggle the quick-settings panel
mshellctl menu dashboard
mshellctl menu mdash              # the richer dashboard variant
mshellctl audio volume 60         # set output volume to 60%
mshellctl audio mute
mshellctl brightness up
mshellctl media toggle            # play/pause the active player
mshellctl wallpaper next
mshellctl theme set kenp          # switch colour scheme live
mshellctl theme list              # show every scheme name
mshellctl doctor                  # shell health check
mshellctl completions zsh         # emit zsh completion script
mshellctl lock
.EE
.in
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR margo (1),
.BR mctl (1),
.BR mscreenshot (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Part of margo, by Kenan Pelit and contributors \(em
.UR https://github.com/kenanpelit/margo
.UE .
